---
title: "Soft Landings"
date: 2023-06-03
author: "Mike Davis"
type: blog
tags: ["change","bias","prejudice","fundamentalism"]
summary: "There are two kinds of change: brut force and soft landings. Pray you get (and create) the latter."
---
I grew up as a Christian. For the first third of my life, I was almost militantly Christian. I still regard myself as a Christian. But, things changed a lot. I found other people, other beliefs, and other ideas. I learned that the world was bigger, much bigger, than my small worldview. Indeed, my Christianity made for a very small world.

Sometimes, when you subscribe to a very narrow range of opinions, growing to embrace a wider range of views can be really hard. It changes relationships, activities of life, commitments, and values. 

Changing was terribly hard for me. 

When I was in high school I audited some seminary classes with my brother. The tome that they used for the textbook broke the subject of systematic theology down into many discrete areas. It was, in fact, systematic. I found it utterly fascinating. What do we know about God? What do we know about humanity? What do we know about sin? What do we know about the future of the world? All of these areas were covered from a Christian point of view. 

Now, four decades later or more, those themes still resonate with me. The difference is I see them as symbolic and not only as Christian. The point of view of this book is that those areas have meaning to every person on Earth. Even if you don't believe in God, you have some kind of conception of the ultimate or an ultimate. Some idea or goal or belief or quality that strikes you as supreme in the world. We all have to deal with guilt. Those ways in which we have brought home to our world and all the creatures in it. We all have some sense of community. Community is a symbol, a kind of church so, for each of these elements of that teenage understanding the systematic theology, there is a universal symbol that fits that description for every person. This book explores those things themes from a human and not distinctly Christian perspective. Those themes are things that all humans have to deal with at some point or another. They are religious less. They speak to what it means to be human. I will try to take these things in a similarly systematic way. Along the way I will try to incorporate my understanding of the sciences and how they relate to these broad symbolic themes. How do we know what is real?

Finally, how does all this relate to soft landings? Arriving at this time in my life, I think, the last 5th of my life, I've had to learn many hard lessons. Along the pathway, there have been people who are immeasurably patient and kind. As my world had to change with new knowledge and new experiences The landings on this new knowledge and these new experiences was often very hard. But all along the way there were people who made The landings softer. By their patient explanation of their life experiences, their perspectives, and by their compassion, they made it easier to embrace new knowledge, things that were very foreign to me before. This book is an effort to help people have softer landings in the process of growth. I'm under No illusion that words can routinely provide a softer landing. In general, I don't think they can. But there have been moments for me where words on a page changed my life dramatically. I remember the book [Parallel Worlds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_Worlds_(book)) by [Michio Kaku](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michio_Kaku). He described the results of the [WMAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilkinson_Microwave_Anisotropy_Probe) microwave satellite looking back into the past of the universe. It was very clear that the Universe was 13.8 billion years old. This was math and it was science. As a creationist, this seemed (and seems) incontrovertible. You could come up with an alternative argument (as Creationists do) such as God creating the world with an *apparent age*. But, why would God do this? As a joke? And, why go to such absurd lengths to protect your beliefs when nature says, *No*? Kaku's book provided a gentle landing for me. I remember reading those paragraphs as though it was yesterday. It was a spiritual experience. 

There are two kinds of change: brut force and soft landings. Pray you get (and create) the latter.
