---
title: "Deep Dive: emotional PPE; stressors and suicide; pain and mindfulness; kindness; COVID"
author: "Mike Davis"
date: "2022-10-30"
type: editorial
tags: ["PPE", "emotions","kindness","genomics", "stress", "suicide","shame"]
description: "In this week's Deep Dive, we talk about emotional PPE; stressors and suicide; pain and mindfulness; kindness; and, COVID"
summary: "In this week's Deep Dive, we talk about emotional PPE; stressors and suicide; pain and mindfulness; kindness; and, COVID"
draft: false
---

I've got a ton of open tabs on Safari and I'm going to start saving them here once I figure out why they were important. 

****

[Emotional PPE](https://emotionalppe.org/faq/) - this is a web site that provides links to free counseling resources for healthcare workers dealing with COVID sequelae.

****

[Medscape - Overlapping Job Stressors May Flag Risk for Physician Suicide](https://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/976717) - Wasn't there a game where you kept stacking something on the camel's back until it broke? Yeah. Like that. Administrative types are happy to assign another job and loath to remove them (except as a reminder that the person couldn't measure up): What could *possibly go wrong with that philosophy*?

***

[The genomic impact of kindness to self vs. others: A randomized controlled trial](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0889159122003336?via%3Dihub) - *Prosocial engagement—doing something kind for others rather than oneself—reduces CTRA gene expression. The nature of kind acts and their intended recipient plays a key role in shaping the genomic impact of kindness.

***

[[Pain Mechanisms ]](https://journals.lww.com/pain/Abstract/9900/Disentangling_self_from_pain__mindfulness.127.aspx) - explores the neurological mechanisms between mindfulness meditation and [[Pain]] attenuation. *Thus, we propose that mindfulness meditation is associated with a novel self-referential nociceptive gating mechanism to reduce pain.*

***

[What is Unique About Kindness? Exploring the Proximal Experience of Prosocial Acts Relative to Other Positive Behaviors](http://sonjalyubomirsky.com/files/2022/07/Regan-Margolis-Ozer-Schwitzgebel-Lyubomirsky-in-press.pdf) - very nice paper about [[kindness]] by colleagues and Sonja Lyubomirsky. *Multilevel models revealed that relative to all other conditions, participants assigned to do kind acts for others reported a greater sense of competence, self- confidence, and meaning while engaging in those acts across the intervention period. Engaging in acts of kindness for others also led to stronger feelings of connection relative to engaging in open-minded behavior or acts of kindness for oneself but did not differ from engaging in extraverted behavior. *

***

[Measuring Work-related Risk of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Comparison of COVID-19 Incidence by Occupation and Industry—Wisconsin, September 2020 to May 2021](https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciac586/6655522?login=false) - incidence of COVID-19 by occupation and industry. Let's see... Yup. Health care workers are near the top of the list. Why? Exposure. And, unnecessary exposure, in some cases, because of selfishness. 


