---
title: "Deep Dive: Articles on contemplative practices and near death experiences"
date: 2023-02-17
author: "Mike Davis"
type: editorial
summary: "This week we consider recent research on mindfulness showing distinct patterns of contemplative practive help well-being. We also look at an article on the death experience during CPR. Maybe we shouldn't blow off those near-death experiences so quickly."
tags: ["dying", "death", "meditation"]
---

In these "weekly" clean-ups (until I come up with a better name) are intended to reduce the number of open tabs on my browsers. If an open tab represents something interesting, I'll try to save a summary of why it was interesting (generally non-commercial) and post it here along with a link. So, let's get started. 

[Contemplative Practices Behavior Is Positively Associated with Well-Being in Three Global Multi-Regional Stanford WELL for Life Cohorts](https://mdpi-res.com/d_attachment/ijerph/ijerph-19-13485/article_deploy/ijerph-19-13485-v3.pdf?version=1666671271)- Abstract: Positive associations between well-being and a single contemplative practice (e.g., [mind- fulness meditation] are well documented, yet prior work may have underestimated the strength of the association by omitting consideration of multiple and/or alternative contemplative practices. Moreover, little is known about how contemplative practice behavior (CPB) impacts different dimensions of well-being. This study investigates the relationship of CPB, consisting of four discrete practices (embodied somatic-observing, non-reactive mindfulness, self-compassion, and compassion for others), with multiple dimensions of well-being. As with other canonical lifestyle behaviors, multiple contemplative practices can be integrated into one’s daily routine. Thus, it is critical to holistically consider these behaviors, extending them beyond a simple uni-dimensional measure (e.g., daily mindfulness meditation practice). We developed an integrative measure of four types of contemplative practice and found it to be significantly associated with a multi-dimensional measure of well-being. Importantly, our findings were from three large global multi-regional cohorts and compared against better-understood lifestyle behaviors (physical activity). Data were drawn from California/San Francisco Bay Area, (n = 6442), Hangzhou City (n = 10,268), and New Taipei City (n = 3033). In all three cohorts, we found statistically significant (p < 0.05) positive associations between CPB and well-being, both overall and with all of the constituent domains of well-being, comparable to or stronger than the relationship with physical activity across most well-being out- comes. These findings provide robust and cross-cultural evidence for a positive association between CPB and well-being, illuminate dimensions of well-being that could be most influenced by CPB, and suggest CPB may be useful to include as part of fundamental lifestyle recommendations for health and well-being. 

['Lucid Dying': EEG Backs Near-Death Experience During CPR](https://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/983675?src=wnl_sci_tech_221109_MSCPEDIT&uac=15177CY&impID=4847860)  - title says it all. The death experience will always be a mystery.